---
layout: post
title:  "Combining materials: what you should know"
date:   2019-11-23 10:50:00 -0500
categories: highlight materials
---
# Combining materials: what you should know

While wood is a great material in its own right, there are of course many other
options. Combining wood and other materials is a good way to modernize your
project, and in some cases, reduce cost. For fine woodwork, there’s really no
need to use anything stronger than wood for 99% of tasks. Most of the time,
these elements are added for decoration and a different look. In this article,
I’ll discuss several of the most common materials that can add to your pieces
aesthetics and function.

## Metal

Obviously, there’s many different types of metal, so for the sake of brevity,
I’ll discuss the 4 most common in these types of projects: brass, steel,
aluminum, and copper. Brass, aluminum, and copper are all fairly similar in use.
These metals are relatively soft, and can often be worked with tools meant for
woodwork. They can add nice decorative features, and are often paired with
darker woods for a modern look. These metals are all good choices for things
like drawer pulls, door handles, hinges, and decorative accents. Steel is a bit
different, although it can do most of the same things as the other three. Steel
can take different finishes to give it a clean, brushed, polished, or rustic
look. It’s popular for making pieces look rustic and vintage, and is also often
used to make legs for tables. It is stronger than wood, and can therefore be
made into parts smaller than what wood could handle. This promotes a minimalist,
simple, and clean aesthetic.

## Glass and Translucent Plastics

Ever popular, glass and plastics have lots of uses. Often, they take the place
of a solid panel in things like cabinet doors, allowing the user to see into the
cabinet from the outside. They can also allow light to escape, making colored
plastics a popular option in wooden lamps. The most obvious use, however, is the
face in picture frames and shadow boxes. Different people have different
requirements for their projects. Plastics like polycarbonate are much stronger
than glass, and lighter weight. They can’t replace the feel and scratch
resistance of actual glass however.

## Leather/fabric

Soft materials like leather and fabric are common in lots of different
applications. Of course, they are often for upholstery to cushion things like
the seat of a chair, but they can also add nice decorative elements to other
areas. leather can make nice handles for boxes and chests, and fabric can be
stretched over a frame to make a nice colorful back panel. The possibilities are
vast with materials like this, and they can really add something to a lot of
projects.
