---
layout: post
title:  "My Shop and Me"
date:   2019-11-23 10:50:00 -0500
categories: highlight me
---
# My Shop and Me

![my-shop-and-me](/assets/images/posts/my-shop-and-me.png)

My name is Ian, and I craft fine woodwork out of my home in central Ohio. For
years, my passion has been not only woodwork, but building a business that makes
it easy for you, the customer, to get the perfect piece of furniture or
woodwork. I have ample experience using modern large machinery, and vintage
style hand tools. I have generations of family heritage of makers and creators,
who worked hard to support their families. Some of the tools I still use today
were owned by my grandfather and great grandfather.

I am partially self taught, although I did learn a great deal from my
grandfather. I enjoy using power tools to do the bulk of the work, and using my
hand tools to refine and create small details. I invest a good portion of my
profit back into my workshop, to help me create a safer and nicer environment
for myself, and create a better piece of woodwork for you, the client. I believe
in ethically sourced materials and natural finishes that don’t contain harmful
chemicals. I mix my own unique blend of natural ingredients in house. It’s a
durable, safe, and long lasting finish that’s easy to repair if need be.

Every project begins and ends at my workbench. Its handbuilt by me, and is truly
the heart of my shop. It has a solid wood top, three feet by four feet, and 4
inches thick. The whole bench weights upwards of 600 pounds. It took four months
to complete, and is probably the project I’m most proud of. It feels only right
that a nice, handmade piece of furniture should come from a nice, handmade
worksurface, instead of one from a factory.

While most projects are designed specifically for the client, I do occasionally
build something of entirely my own design. When something in the world inspires
me, I spend some time drawing plans for a project that incorporates it. 10% of
those projects are created, and the rest are unused plans collecting dust. I
hope someday to make all of those projects.

Part of what I love about this business is the ability for me to work one on one
with customers to help realize their vision for the perfect piece. When you
submit a custom order, I create a portfolio for the project. I design 2 or more
different variants, typically at different price points, and send you a computer
rendering of each separate design as well as pricing information.

While fine furniture is expensive, I do my best to keep the price down without
reducing quality. Each item is priced fairly and consistently, using a program
that I designed. Because of my portfolio system, I store all information
applicable to a project. This means if you run into issues and want to pause the
project, we won't have to start the design process from the beginning. I do my
best to meet deadlines and be prompt with communication. No customer is a
priority customer, even if you spent more. All projects, no matter how small,
are built with the same care and attention to detail. Therefore, all clients
ought to be given the same treatment and care.
